---
title: Assertions
description: The building block of testing.
weight: 5
---

## Class video from Spring 25
Ignore the slide about exams.

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube-nocookie.com/embed/0aeufM1Kl1g?si=KTT_ISVuFfTvVsHL" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" referrerpolicy="strict-origin-when-cross-origin" allowfullscreen></iframe>

## Software testing

Software testing is both a manual and an automated effort. 

***Manual testing*** is when a tester (or user) enters values into the user interface and checks the behavior of the system. 

***Automated testing*** is where test code is used to check the results of the main product code. Automated testing is an essential part of ***program verification***, which is an evaluation that software is behaving as specified and is free from errors.

Automated testing is a necessity in real systems with thousands of lines of code and many complex features. Manual testing is simply infeasible to do thoroughly. 

## Code that verifies code?
*Automated testing* in this case means writing code. Developers and testers write code and scripts that executes and tests some other code.

### Exercise
1. Create a directory named `testing-lab` in your `seng-201/` directory.
2. Download [`sample.py`](sample.py) and put it in the `testing-lab/` directory. 
3. Open the folder in PyCharm and run `sample.py`.

The function calls in the `__main__` section of code are a *semi-automated* test. The calls are automated, but the *verification* is still manual -- you, the developer, have to verify that the output is indeed correct.

To have *automated testing*, we need a programmatic indicator of correctness. Enter the `assert` statement.

## The `assert` statement
Nearly all programming languages have an `assert` keyword. An ***assertion*** checks if a value is `True` or `False`. If `True`, it does nothing. If `False`, the `assert` throws a special type of exception. Assertions are commonly used in languages like C and Ada to verify that something is True before continuing execution. 

In most modern languages, including Python, the `assert` is the basis of automated testing. 

### Exercise
Let's explore the `assert` in Python.
1. Create a new file named `test_sample.py` in the `testing-lab/` directory. Edit the file in PyCharm.
2. Add the following code:
   {{< card code=true header="`test_sample.py`" lang="python" >}}
assert True
assert False
print("Made it to the bottom.")
{{< /card >}}
3. Run `test_sample.py`. Notice the following.
   - `assert True` does not **produce any output. The program simply continues.**
   - `assert False` **generates an exception.** This is expected.
   - The `print(...)` statement did not execute because the exception generated by `assert False` crashed the program.
4. Comment out the `assert False` line and run it again. The `print(...)` statement will execute.
 

This demonstrates the behavior of `assert`. Let's add some more interesting assertions. Add the following lines to the bottom of `test_sample.py`:
   {{< card code=true header="`test_sample.py`" lang="python" >}}
x = 2**5
assert x == 32
assert type("Bob") == str
y = 16
assert x-y==16 and type("Bob") == str and int("25") == 25
print("Made it to the bottom.")
{{< /card >}}

The right-hand side of the `assert` statements now use comparisons and boolean operators. This looks a bit more realistic. The `assert` can have **any** simple or complex Boolean expression so long as it evaluates to `True` or `False`.

**Quick Exercise**: Change the operators or values in the expressions so they evaluate to `False`. Notice how the last `assert` can fail if any of the comparisons are false.

We'll put our assertions to work testing program code [in the next lab.](../unit-test/)

## Knowledge check
- Question: What two things are you trying to verify with *program verification*?
- Question: Why do we need automated testing?
- Question: What happens next if a Python program encounters the statement `assert True`?
- Question: What happens next if a Python program encounters the statement `assert False`?
- Question: What happens when the following executes: `assert 16 == 2**4`?
- Question: What happens when the following executes? `assert len('Bob') > 0 and 'Bob' == 'Alice'`